Resources/doc/index.rst, before:

About LyraAdminBundle
=====================

LyraAdminBundle consists of a set of **Twig** templates, a base controller
for CRUD actions and some 'renderer' services to simplify the creation of a
backend area powered by **jQuery** and **jQuery UI** widgets.

This bundle is being developed to provide a common backend interface to all
bundles that make part of **Lyra CMS**, however it can also be used independently
from the CMS as a standalone standard Symfony2 bundle.

This is a work in progress and many essential features are still missing.
However existing features should work and it should be possible to successfully
follow the basic (currently incomplete) ``Getting started`` tutorial you will
find below.

If you test the bundle and find errors please use the GitHub issue tracker
to report them. Suggestions are also welcome.

Note
====

Former symfony users will notice quite a few similarities between this bundle
and the symfony 1.x *Admin Generator*: the backend area is organized in a
similar way and offers the same kind of *views*.

List view
---------

This view displays a set of records in a grid layout with sortable columns and
pagination. From the list view you can perform different *actions*.

*   **List actions**: ``new`` is the default list action.

*   **Object actions**: these actions always affects a single record displayed
    in a grid row. Default object actions are ``edit`` and ``delete``.

*   **Batch actions**: these actions affects multiple records selected with
    the grid *check boxes*. Default batch actions is ``delete``.

Form view
---------

This view displays the form to insert and edit a record. Form fields can be
ordered and grouped in *panels*. Separate configuration options are available
for ``new`` and ``edit`` form.

----

That being said, there are important differences between LyraAdminBundle and
the symfony *Admin Generator*.

*   This bundle is not a **code generator**, it utilizes Twig template
    inheritance and class inheritance to provide a base backend interface users
    can extend to fit their needs.

*   In place of storing configuration options in a dedicated file (``generator.yml``),
    the bundle exposes a semantic configuration handled by a `service container
    extension`_ and stores configuration options as Dependency Injection Container
    parameters.

*   The overall layout of the backend area can be customized with one of the
    many jQuery UI *themes*, while the user interface is enhanced by standard 
    jQuery UI *widgets* (buttons, modal dialogs).

.. _service container extension: http://symfony.com/doc/current/book/service_container.html#importing-configuration-via-container-extensions

Installation
============

From your project root folder run::

    git submodule add git://github.com/mgiagnoni/LyraAdminBundle.git vendor/bundles/Lyra/AdminBundle

To install the bundle as git submodule your whole project must be under version
control with git or the command ``git submodule add`` will return an error. In
this case, you can simply clone the repository::

    git clone git://github.com/mgiagnoni/LyraAdminBundle.git vendor/bundles/Lyra/AdminBundle

Register namespace
------------------

``Lyra`` namespace must be registered for use by the autoloader::

    // app/autoload.php

    $loader->registerNamespaces(array(
        // other namespaces
        'Lyra'  => __DIR__.'/../vendor/bundles',
    ));

    // ...

Add bundle to application kernel
--------------------------------

::

    // app/AppKernel.php

    public function registerBundles()
    {
        $bundles = array(
            // other bundles
            new Lyra\AdminBundle\LyraAdminBundle(),
        );

    // ...

Importing routes
----------------

The bundle routing file must be imported in your application configuration::

    # app/config/routing.yml

    LyraAdminBundle:
        resource: "@LyraAdminBundle/Resources/config/routing.yml"


Enable translator
-----------------

Translator must be always enabled as all messages in default templates
(i.e. button text used for default actions) are *keywords* while actual
text is in translation catalogues::

    # app/config/config.yml

    framework:
        translator: { fallback: en }

Publish bundle assets
---------------------

::

    app/console assets:install web

Load jQuery and jQuery UI
-------------------------

Javascript files needed by **jQuery** and **jQuery UI** scripts are not included
in the bundle package. The default base layout of the bundle loads these scripts
from **Google CDN**. If this doesn't fit your needs, for example because you
want to test the bundle on your *localhost* without an active Internet connection
or for any other reason, copy this file::

    [LyraAdminBundle folder]/Resources/views/Admin/jquery_js.html.twig

to::

    [Your project folder]/app/Resources/LyraAdminBundle/views/Admin/jquery_js.html.twig

Edit the file as you need. For example if you have stored *jquery.min.js* and
*jquery-ui.min.js* in ``web/js``::

    {# jquery_js.html.twig #}

    <script type="text/javascript" src="{{ asset('js/jquery.min.js') }}"></script>
    <script type="text/javascript" src="{{ asset('js/jquery-ui.min.js') }}"></script>

Getting started
===============

To demonstrate the very basic features of **LyraAdminBundle** let's generate a 
simple bundle and create an admin area for it. Our example bundle will be named
**AcmeClassifiedsBundle**: its purpose is managing a simple advertising board
where users and administrators of the site can post classified ads.

**SensioGeneratorBundle** (included in Symfony2 *Standard Edition*) is the ideal
tool to quickly generate the basic structure of the bundle. From your project
root folder run the following command::

    app/console generate:bundle --namespace=Acme/ClassifiedsBundle --dir=src --format=yml --no-interaction

Generate a ``Listing`` entity::

    app/console generate:doctrine:entity --entity=AcmeClassifiedsBundle:Listing --fields="ad_title:string(255) ad_text:text posted_at:datetime expires_at:datetime published:boolean" --with-repository --no-interaction

Create the table in the database::

    app/console doctrine:schema:update --force

Configure LyraAdminBundle to create an admin area where you will perform all
CRUD operations on the ``Listing`` entity::

    # app/config/config.yml

    lyra_admin:
        models:
            listing:
                class: 'Acme\ClassifiedsBundle\Entity\Listing'
                list:
                    title: Listings
                    columns:
                        ad_title: ~ 
                        published: ~
                        posted_at: ~


Do not forget to clear cache before proceeding::

    app/console cache:clear

Access backend area
-------------------

If you go to ``http://.../app_dev.php/admin/listing/list`` you will see an
empty list of *Listings*: you can then add, edit, delete, publish/unpublish
a listing object.

Some configuration options are available to customize the list of records
(``Listings`` in our example).

Basic list configuration
------------------------

The label displayed inside colum headings is guessed from entity mapping
informations, you can change it for each column by explicitly setting the
``label`` option::

    # app/config/config.yml

        # ... #
            list:
                columns:
                    ad_title: ~ 
                    published: ~    
                    posted_at: 
                        label: Date

All list columns are sortable, you can change this default behavior with the
``sortable`` option. The following configuration will make the list not sortable
by the value of the *Published* column::

    # app/config/config.yml

        # ... #
            list:
                columns:
                    ad_title: ~ 
                    published: 
                        sortable: false
                    posted_at: ~ 

Use the ``format`` option to format a column content. For columns displaying
dates you can use all format strings allowed by the PHP function ``date``,for
any other column you can use all format placeholders allowed by PHP functions
``printf``, ``sprintf``::

    # app/config/config.yml

        # ... #
            list:
                columns:
                    ad_title: ~
                    published: ~
                    posted_at:
                        label: Date
                        format: 'j/M/Y'

Action buttons configuration
----------------------------

The button to create a new record has a generic text *New* and a default icon.
Here is how you can you change the configuration if you prefer a more descriptive
text and a different icon::

    # app/config/config.yml

        # ... #
            actions:
                new:
                    text: 'New listing'
                    icon: circle-plus
            list:
                columns:
                    # ... #

The value of the ``icon`` option must be the class name (without the ``ui-icon-``
part) used in **jQuery UI** theme stylesheet for the icon. You can find all
available icons on the `Theme roller`_  home page.

.. _Theme roller: http://jqueryui.com/themeroller/

You can customize all the other default actions (``edit``, ``delete``) in the
same way.

Basic form configuration
------------------------

Even if the form to create and edit a ``Listing`` object is fully functional
without any configuration, you will usually need to re-order the fields, group
them in panels or remove some fields from view. A simple example::

    # app/config/config.yml

    lyra_admin:
        models:
            listing:
                class: 'Acme\ClassifiedsBundle\Entity\Listing'
                form:
                    groups:
                        listing:
                            # panel title
                            caption: Listing
                            fields: [ad_title,ad_text]
                            # column break after this panel
                            break_after: true
                        status:
                            caption: Status
                            fields: [published,expires_at]
                list:
                    # ... #

With this configuration form fields are grouped in two panels displayed on two
columns (see the ``break_after`` option). You will notice that the ``posted_at``
field is not present in any panel: this field will not be visible and not
editable through the form. This can be useful for fields you want to automatically
update via a Doctrine *lifecycle callback* and that cannot be changed by users.

Change admin theme
------------------

The bundle includes two themes: ``ui-lightness`` (default) and ``smoothness``.
To change theme use this configuration::

    # app/config/config.yml

    lyra_admin:
        theme: smoothness
        models:
            listing:
                # ... #

You can get additional themes from the `Theme roller`_ page on the jQuery UI website.
Once you have downloaded the desired theme, *Redmond* for example, uncompress
the package::

    jquery-ui-#.#.#.custom.zip
        css
            redmond <- only this folder and its contents are needed
                images
                    jquery-ui-#.#.#.custom.css <- rename as jquery-ui.custom.css


The package contains some stuff you will not need for use with the bundle.
Move only the folder with the same name of the theme somewhere inside your
project public folder (usually ``web``), for example ``web/css/ui_themes``, 
renaming the theme css file as indicated above. To use the new theme edit the
bundle configuration in this way::

    # app/config/config.yml

    lyra_admin:
        # path to theme folder *relative* to application public folder
        theme: css/ui_themes/redmond
        models:
            listing:
                # ... #


.. _Theme roller: http://jqueryui.com/themeroller/

[to be continued ...]

Commit message:

Updated docs with info on filter configuration

Resources/doc/index.rst, after:

About LyraAdminBundle
=====================

LyraAdminBundle consists of a set of **Twig** templates, a base controller
for CRUD actions and some 'renderer' services to simplify the creation of a
backend area powered by **jQuery** and **jQuery UI** widgets.

This bundle is being developed to provide a common backend interface to all
bundles that make part of **Lyra CMS**, however it can also be used independently
from the CMS as a standalone standard Symfony2 bundle.

This is a work in progress and many essential features are still missing.
However existing features should work and it should be possible to successfully
follow the basic (currently incomplete) ``Getting started`` tutorial you will
find below.

If you test the bundle and find errors please use the GitHub issue tracker
to report them. Suggestions are also welcome.

Note
====

Former symfony users will notice quite a few similarities between this bundle
and the symfony 1.x *Admin Generator*: the backend area is organized in a
similar way and offers the same kind of *views*.

List view
---------

This view displays a set of records in a grid layout with sortable columns and
pagination. From the list view you can perform different *actions*.

*   **List actions**: ``new`` is the default list action.

*   **Object actions**: these actions always affects a single record displayed
    in a grid row. Default object actions are ``edit`` and ``delete``.

*   **Batch actions**: these actions affects multiple records selected with
    the grid *check boxes*. Default batch actions is ``delete``.

Form view
---------

This view displays the form to insert and edit a record. Form fields can be
ordered and grouped in *panels*. Separate configuration options are available
for ``new`` and ``edit`` form.

----

That being said, there are important differences between LyraAdminBundle and
the symfony *Admin Generator*.

*   This bundle is not a **code generator**, it utilizes Twig template
    inheritance and class inheritance to provide a base backend interface users
    can extend to fit their needs.

*   In place of storing configuration options in a dedicated file (``generator.yml``),
    the bundle exposes a semantic configuration handled by a `service container
    extension`_ and stores configuration options as Dependency Injection Container
    parameters.

*   The overall layout of the backend area can be customized with one of the
    many jQuery UI *themes*, while the user interface is enhanced by standard 
    jQuery UI *widgets* (buttons, modal dialogs).

.. _service container extension: http://symfony.com/doc/current/book/service_container.html#importing-configuration-via-container-extensions

Installation
============

From your project root folder run::

    git submodule add git://github.com/mgiagnoni/LyraAdminBundle.git vendor/bundles/Lyra/AdminBundle

To install the bundle as git submodule your whole project must be under version
control with git or the command ``git submodule add`` will return an error. In
this case, you can simply clone the repository::

    git clone git://github.com/mgiagnoni/LyraAdminBundle.git vendor/bundles/Lyra/AdminBundle

Register namespace
------------------

``Lyra`` namespace must be registered for use by the autoloader::

    // app/autoload.php

    $loader->registerNamespaces(array(
        // other namespaces
        'Lyra'  => __DIR__.'/../vendor/bundles',
    ));

    // ...

Add bundle to application kernel
--------------------------------

::

    // app/AppKernel.php

    public function registerBundles()
    {
        $bundles = array(
            // other bundles
            new Lyra\AdminBundle\LyraAdminBundle(),
        );

    // ...

Importing routes
----------------

The bundle routing file must be imported in your application configuration::

    # app/config/routing.yml

    LyraAdminBundle:
        resource: "@LyraAdminBundle/Resources/config/routing.yml"


Enable translator
-----------------

Translator must be always enabled as all messages in default templates
(i.e. button text used for default actions) are *keywords* while actual
text is in translation catalogues::

    # app/config/config.yml

    framework:
        translator: { fallback: en }

Publish bundle assets
---------------------

::

    app/console assets:install web

Load jQuery and jQuery UI
-------------------------

Javascript files needed by **jQuery** and **jQuery UI** scripts are not included
in the bundle package. The default base layout of the bundle loads these scripts
from **Google CDN**. If this doesn't fit your needs, for example because you
want to test the bundle on your *localhost* without an active Internet connection
or for any other reason, copy this file::

    [LyraAdminBundle folder]/Resources/views/Admin/jquery_js.html.twig

to::

    [Your project folder]/app/Resources/LyraAdminBundle/views/Admin/jquery_js.html.twig

Edit the file as you need. For example if you have stored *jquery.min.js* and
*jquery-ui.min.js* in ``web/js``::

    {# jquery_js.html.twig #}

    <script type="text/javascript" src="{{ asset('js/jquery.min.js') }}"></script>
    <script type="text/javascript" src="{{ asset('js/jquery-ui.min.js') }}"></script>

Getting started
===============

To demonstrate the very basic features of **LyraAdminBundle** let's generate a 
simple bundle and create an admin area for it. Our example bundle will be named
**AcmeClassifiedsBundle**: its purpose is managing a simple advertising board
where users and administrators of the site can post classified ads.

**SensioGeneratorBundle** (included in Symfony2 *Standard Edition*) is the ideal
tool to quickly generate the basic structure of the bundle. From your project
root folder run the following command::

    app/console generate:bundle --namespace=Acme/ClassifiedsBundle --dir=src --format=yml --no-interaction

Generate a ``Listing`` entity::

    app/console generate:doctrine:entity --entity=AcmeClassifiedsBundle:Listing --fields="ad_title:string(255) ad_text:text posted_at:datetime expires_at:datetime published:boolean" --with-repository --no-interaction

Create the table in the database::

    app/console doctrine:schema:update --force

Configure LyraAdminBundle to create an admin area where you will perform all
CRUD operations on the ``Listing`` entity::

    # app/config/config.yml

    lyra_admin:
        models:
            listing:
                class: 'Acme\ClassifiedsBundle\Entity\Listing'
                list:
                    title: Listings
                    columns:
                        ad_title: ~ 
                        published: ~
                        posted_at: ~


Do not forget to clear cache before proceeding::

    app/console cache:clear

Access backend area
-------------------

If you go to ``http://.../app_dev.php/admin/listing/list`` you will see an
empty list of *Listings*: you can then add, edit, delete, publish/unpublish
a listing object.

Some configuration options are available to customize the list of records
(``Listings`` in our example).

Basic list configuration
------------------------

The label displayed inside colum headings is guessed from entity mapping
informations, you can change it for each column by explicitly setting the
``label`` option::

    # app/config/config.yml

        # ... #
            list:
                columns:
                    ad_title: ~ 
                    published: ~    
                    posted_at: 
                        label: Date

All list columns are sortable, you can change this default behavior with the
``sortable`` option. The following configuration will make the list not sortable
by the value of the *Published* column::

    # app/config/config.yml

        # ... #
            list:
                columns:
                    ad_title: ~ 
                    published: 
                        sortable: false
                    posted_at: ~ 

Use the ``format`` option to format a column content. For columns displaying
dates you can use all format strings allowed by the PHP function ``date``,for
any other column you can use all format placeholders allowed by PHP functions
``printf``, ``sprintf``::

    # app/config/config.yml

        # ... #
            list:
                columns:
                    ad_title: ~
                    published: ~
                    posted_at:
                        label: Date
                        format: 'j/M/Y'

Action buttons configuration
----------------------------

The button to create a new record has a generic text *New* and a default icon.
Here is how you can you change the configuration if you prefer a more descriptive
text and a different icon::

    # app/config/config.yml

        # ... #
            actions:
                new:
                    text: 'New listing'
                    icon: circle-plus
            list:
                columns:
                    # ... #

The value of the ``icon`` option must be the class name (without the ``ui-icon-``
part) used in **jQuery UI** theme stylesheet for the icon. You can find all
available icons on the `Theme roller`_  home page.

.. _Theme roller: http://jqueryui.com/themeroller/

You can customize all the other default actions (``edit``, ``delete``) in the
same way.

Filter configuration
--------------------

List results can be filtered by the value of one or more of the ``Listing``
entity fields. Example::

    # app/config/config.yml

        # ... #
            filter:
                # search dialog title
                title: Search listings
                fields:
                    ad_title: ~
                    posted_at: ~
                    published: ~
            list:
                columns:
                    # ... #

With these options ``Listing`` objects are searchable by title, posting date
(from/to range) and published status.

This feature is not fully implemented yet and it works only for string, datetime
and boolean fields.

Basic form configuration
------------------------

Even if the form to create and edit a ``Listing`` object is fully functional
without any configuration, you will usually need to re-order the fields, group
them in panels or remove some fields from view. A simple example::

    # app/config/config.yml

    lyra_admin:
        models:
            listing:
                class: 'Acme\ClassifiedsBundle\Entity\Listing'
                form:
                    groups:
                        listing:
                            # panel title
                            caption: Listing
                            fields: [ad_title,ad_text]
                            # column break after this panel
                            break_after: true
                        status:
                            caption: Status
                            fields: [published,expires_at]
                list:
                    # ... #

With this configuration form fields are grouped in two panels displayed on two
columns (see the ``break_after`` option). You will notice that the ``posted_at``
field is not present in any panel: this field will not be visible and not
editable through the form. This can be useful for fields you want to automatically
update via a Doctrine *lifecycle callback* and that cannot be changed by users.

Change admin theme
------------------

The bundle includes two themes: ``ui-lightness`` (default) and ``smoothness``.
To change theme use this configuration::

    # app/config/config.yml

    lyra_admin:
        theme: smoothness
        models:
            listing:
                # ... #

You can get additional themes from the `Theme roller`_ page on the jQuery UI website.
Once you have downloaded the desired theme, *Redmond* for example, uncompress
the package::

    jquery-ui-#.#.#.custom.zip
        css
            redmond <- only this folder and its contents are needed
                images
                    jquery-ui-#.#.#.custom.css <- rename as jquery-ui.custom.css


The package contains some stuff you will not need for use with the bundle.
Move only the folder with the same name of the theme somewhere inside your
project public folder (usually ``web``), for example ``web/css/ui_themes``, 
renaming the theme css file as indicated above. To use the new theme edit the
bundle configuration in this way::

    # app/config/config.yml

    lyra_admin:
        # path to theme folder *relative* to application public folder
        theme: css/ui_themes/redmond
        models:
            listing:
                # ... #


.. _Theme roller: http://jqueryui.com/themeroller/

[to be continued ...]
